[Music]
why dead whales are so dangerous whales
are truly fascinating creatures one of
the coolest things about them is they're
gargantuan size take the blue whale for
instance it's not just the largest
living being on earth nowadays it's the
largest animal that's ever existed on
this planet you could easily walk
through a blue whale's arteries and its
tongue alone weighs more than a
full-grown elephant this almost
spellbinding fascination explains why a
beached whale so easily gathers crowds
of onlookers people don't want to miss
out on such a rare opportunity to steal
a peek at this giant from up close if
only they knew how incredibly dangerous
it is to stand near a dead whale today
you're gonna find out exactly why that
is but first remember to hit that
subscribe button to join the bright side
of life
we put out new videos every single day
so don't forget to ring that
notification bell so that you won't miss
a thing all right back to whales the
hazardous thing about dead whales is
they tend to explode yes you heard that
right and when this happens it's no joke
in just a fraction of a second several
tons of a whale's insides burst out of
its body at over 45 miles an hour flying
up to 50 feet in the air and reaching a
distance of more than 160 feet
that means innocent bystanders risk not
only getting covered with disgusting
vile smelling goo but also getting
injured by a whales enormous heavy guts
flying out of its body at high speeds
this danger increases tenfold if
somebody decides to climb on top of or
poke the carcass in fact there have been
cases of people standing on a beached
whale being literally blown into the air
but why exactly do they explode well
after a whale dies its insides start to
giving off methane a highly explosive
gas as a by-product this gas accumulates
in air pockets until the pressure
reaches unsurpassable levels but methane
isn't the only gas that builds up in the
body of a dead whale during
decomposition several other gases are
released and to tell you the truth there
a lot stinkier than methane during the
process of fermentation different
tissues of a dead body dry out producing
gases like carbon dioxide during
purification proteins and tissue
breakdown
this not only liquefies organs it also
produces some really foul smells you as
you can imagine when fermentation and
Putra fication come together the result
is a huge bloated carcass full of
built-up gases and there's one more
thing about whales under their extremely
tough skin these animals have a thick
layer of fat called blubber when you add
those two factors to the equation it
becomes clear why these trapped gases
have a hard time escaping but what about
through the blowhole anus or other exits
well in a specially larger or more
bloated beached whales their own body
weight often causes their orifices to
close up creating the perfect storm for
an impending explosion so that means
there are two possible scenarios when it
comes to decaying beached whales either
the massive creature will explode or the
gases will find an exit and the carcass
will simply deflate unfortunately you
can't know for sure which one it'll be
it's a lot like a ticking time bomb
ready to go off without warning at any
second in fact this process of
decomposition happens in the body of
pretty much any dead creature
it's just that whales explode like a
volcano due to the sheer size of these
mammals the bigger and animal is
especially one with tough skin and a
thick layer of fat the more gas and
pressure build up in its body that's why
a lot of experts believe that local
officials should organize transportation
to move the carcasses of beached whales
back
to the sea then after the vicinity has
been cleared of noisy onlookers it's
safe to make a slit in the carcass to
release the internal pressure that way a
much more dangerous explosion can be
avoided but still even in the case of
controlled and planned procedure things
can go terribly wrong
for example if somebody accidentally
cuts in too deep the release of the
built-up gases will be extremely wild so
it's difficult to control this situation
even for experts to give you some idea
of what can happen when a bloated whale
isn't deflated I'll tell you a few
stories in 2004 researchers in Taiwan
were transporting a 60 ton sperm whale
carcass on a flatbed truck to national
Cheng Tong University where they wanted
to dissect and study unfortunately the
whale unexpectedly burst and route
splattering bystanders cars houses and
shops with guts and blood gives a whole
new expression - there she blows sorry
but so far the most spectacular and
terrifying whale explosion happened in
Oregon in 1970 a large sperm whale
washed ashore in Florence and soon
turned into a huge smelly disaster local
authorities were at a loss as to what to
do with the carcass finally they decided
to use dynamite their plan was to blast
the whale into tiny pieces and thus make
it more edible for sea creatures crabs
and birds the idea wasn't necessarily
bad until something went terribly wrong
the officials put over half a ton of
dynamite under the whales body a
military veteran with years of
experience in explosives had warned them
that this was way too much but
unfortunately no one took his advice so
about 70 bystanders were told to move a
quarter of a mile away and the
explosives were set off the blast was so
powerful that it rocked the beach chunks
of rotting flesh and internal organs
flew into the air and started to fall on
the horrified crowd luckily nobody was
serious
the injured but most cars parked in the
vicinity were crushed by the fleshy
debris a journalist on the scene
Paul linman later recalled that one car
was literally flattened by a piece as
big as a coffee table the whale's body
managed to decorate everything within a
radius of eight hundred feet but the
worst thing became obvious after the
dust had settled the chunks were still
too big for any animal to eat not to
mention a huge piece of the carcass
remained intact even after the explosion
so in the end authorities still had to
clean up all the mess on their own and
now they had an even bigger mess to deal
with than before
you may be wondering what happens to a
whale when it dies at sea nothing
unusual actually it's carcass eventually
sinks to the seafloor
it's too massive for predators to tear
apart so the dead animal typically
arrives at the bottom in one piece and
since whales are so big different
communities eventually start growing
around this impressive source of food
the first animals to arrive and feast
are deep-sea sharks hagfish and other
predators they break the carcass into
pieces and strip off its soft tissues
then creatures such as bone eating worms
like oh stacks mucus loris destroy the
skeleton believe it or not this process
can go on for over 30 years and sustain
a lot of living beings in the area this
means that a whale's afterlife is as
ecologically important as its living one
have you ever seen a whale in your life
either dead or alive do you know any
other fascinating facts about these
creatures tell us in the comments below
show us that you had the stomach to make
it to the end of this video by giving it
a like thanks for joining us today on
the bright side of life